Today, I have the pleasure of interviewing Gordon Ritter,
an elite by-side quantitative trader and professor who
developed the backtesting project in AI for trading ND.
Gordon, what first attracted you to a career in finance,
and what do you find fascinating about the field?
Well, I was originally attracted to a career in finance because
of a totally amazing teacher I had in graduate school.
His name was Robert C. Merton.
Professor Merton was a professor in the Harvard Business School at the time.
So he was teaching a course in continuous time finance over at Harvard Business School.
I was a student not in the business school,
but in the physics department at the time.
I was getting my PhD in Mathematical Physics,
but I audited Merton's class and I learned
that some very advanced and interesting mathematics was actually involved in finance.
The field is now fascinating to me as a former mathematician,
a former mathematical physicist because for one thing,
it's something that nearly everyone cares about.
Almost everyone has some connection to the financial markets,
even if it's just casually following the stock market.
Yet, some of the most successful investors in
history are actually mathematicians and physicists,
and apply very interesting,
very deep mathematics to the markets.
So is the mathematical side one of the things that
continues to pique your interest in the field?
Yes, absolutely.
We continue to find interesting
and challenging mathematics problems as we go along the way.
So what was your path into your current career?
Well, after taking Merton's course in my last year of graduate school,
I applied for quantitative positions in hedge funds.
I also applied for academic post-doctoral fellowships as I wasn't entirely decided yet,
but my original plan had always been to pursue a career in
academia and it was hard to let go of that.
So I also applied to post-doctoral fellowships,
which in academia is a path towards a tenure track faculty position,
and I was offered some of each kind of jobs.
So I was offered some postdocs,
some quantitative analyst or quantitative strategists positions in hedge funds,
and I had to make an agonizing decision because I couldn't do both at the same time.
In the end, I think it was the right decision,
and fast forward to today,
I'm fortunate enough to have a position in the industry where I get to
lead a dual life as a practitioner and an academic.
So this way, I think of it as the
best of both worlds and I get to do something that has a big impact in industry.
But I also never truly had to disconnect from the job that
I had always prepared for as a young person and always thought I would do,
which was the job of a professor.
What advice would you give to someone just starting a career in finance,
and what are some common misconceptions of people just starting out?
Great question. I think if you're looking to start a career in finance,
you should first of all do it because you love finance.
So for example, if you find yourself reading
the Journal of Finance in your spare time because maybe that's, to you,
more interesting and fun than the latest video game or something else you do for fun,
that would be a good indication that a career in finance is the right choice for you.
One of the misconceptions of those starting out in
finance and in quantitative finance in particular,
is that it's easy or that various easy things have not been tried yet.
In my experience, some of the best mathematical minds in
finance are among some of the best mathematicians in the world.
Period. Full stop.
How important is knowledge in
different subject areas like math and accounting, for example?
Knowledge in those subject areas is very important, Liz.
One that also gets overlooked,
I think, is knowledge in computer science.
I think knowledge of computer science is
absolutely crucial in modern quantitative finance.
Occasionally, I encounter someone who wants to do quantitative finance,
but who has no concept of real computer programming
beyond a little bit of some simple scripting language.
Most of the really good quantitative traders I know would easily handle
a programming interview at an elite Silicon Valley firm in Java or C++,
but they chose finance because that
was just what interested them and what they really love.
Gordon, how important is background knowledge in accounting?
Well, I think very important,
and this is something that's often overlooked.
You can get a PhD in accounting.
If you look at many of the top business schools,
such as Columbia Business School,
offer a PhD in accounting where you can study value
investing for five or six years and write a PhD thesis on it.
This is knowledge that takes a long time to acquire.
You can make a career studying it.
This is important knowledge for deciding what a company is really worth.
What are the best ways to develop key skills,
especially if you don't have a degree from a name-brand school?
I think one of the best ways to develop key skills is by trying
things out on your own and finding out what works.
So to take an analogy from computer science.
Computer Programmers often call this hacking in the positive sense of the term,
of just getting in front of a computer and writing
some code and eventually learning what works and what doesn't.
I think one of the purposes of our projects here is to
get people to try to do that with some financial data.
What do people in finance mean by market intuition,
and what's the best way to develop it?
I think some people coming from
quantitative fields tend to think of a market as this huge dataset.
In actual fact, the market is a mechanism by which
trade is affected among people and corporations,
which are ultimately composed of people, anyway.
One starts of thinking,
well, who are those people?
Why are they trading?
What are the economic forces driving their trading decisions?
At the end of the day, if your algorithm is looking at a data point,
what is the actual meaning in the real world of that piece of data?
So to develop that knowledge and intuition,
I think you have to do two things.
So on the one hand,
you should study finance and economics.
For example, a PhD in finance or accounting or financial economics is great for that,
or if you don't have time to get a PhD,
at very least study those things on your own.
On the other hand, I think you have to also watch the markets for
a long time to see how those theories of
economic behavior are actually put into practice.
So it's not an easy or a short path,
which is why I also say it has to be something that you love intrinsically.
What general practices, attitudes,
or habits are most important to being successful in your field?
Well, I view investing as a science.
So I think if you look at good scientists in any field of science,
and in particular in the science of investing, well,
they should be skeptical and they should
be very rigorous in applying the scientific method.
Experiments should be clear about
what models or what hypotheses those experiments are testing.
The experimental results need to be analyzed using proper statistical methods.
Beyond that, I think I can best answer this with an anecdote or an example.
So one of the best quantitative traders I've ever
known was someone who did not have a PhD,
but he loves to take things apart and understand
how they work using scientific principles.
He can fix almost anything with a circuit in it from a toaster to an airplane,
and he in fact, he used to work as an engineer on something involving satellites.
It's almost impossible to convince him of something that is in fact false,
and he tries to see the world as it really is,
not as what we would want it to be.
That comes through in building models.
Because if you fit something,
just some training data and it appears to fit very well,
we'd all like to believe that we found the next great model,
but it may simply have been overfit.
So what has to come into play is a desire to see things as they are.
What do you find most rewarding about working in your field?
The thing I love most about working in finance is that
the work itself is intellectual and fun,
while at the same time having real-world consequences
that I can see quickly having an impact in the real world.
Another thing I really like is just the people that you meet along the way.
A lot of interesting,
curious characters in the best possible sense.
Thanks Gordon so much for talking with me.
I look forward to talking to you again.
Well, thank you for having me. It's been a lot of fun.